Proposal to perform continuous HW introspection on Baremetal IPI hosts (#229)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/baremetal/continuous-hw-introspection.md

---

> title: Continuous HW introspecton of Baremetal IPI hosts

Reviewer: Nit: could we expand HW to `hardware` everywhere in this request? All reviewers may not immediately understand

Author: Done.

approvers:
  - "@dhellmann"
  - "@enxebre"
creation-date: 2020-02-18
last-updated: 2020-02-17
status: provisional|implementable|implemented|deferred|rejected|withdrawn|replaced
---

# Continuous HW introspection of Baremetal IPI hosts

This proposal talks about how performing continuous HW introspection on all master and
and worker nodes in a Baremetal IPI deployment would get us important data about the
baremetal hosts which potentially can be used to monitor the health of individual nodes and
the deployment as a whole.

This enhancement will not result in a new CRD or API to be written but will detail
data that would become availabe in the Status field of the BareMetalHost CRD.

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [X] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Continuous HW inspection on all the master and worker nodes that are a part of
a Baremetal IPI deployment, allow the user to detect changes in server hardware

> and become aware of any alarms or failures seen on the servers. This information

Reviewer 2: Does the inspection client actually collect alarms or failures? I thought it just looked at what hardware was present in the server. https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/master/design/hardware-status.md talks about SMART for drive stats, but I thought that was added to the node_exporter data separately.

Author: Inspection client does not actually collect alarms. I was looking at these fields in the baremetal host CRD : https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/blob/master/deploy/crds/metal3.io_baremetalhosts_crd.yaml#L211-L222. Based on the type of error, module that is reading this field could potentially raise an alarm.

Reviewer 2: OK, those fields aren't related to inspection, they're general status fields reported by the baremetal-operator as it reconciles the host.

can be used to report important information to the user and/or glean metrics

> about the health and performance of the deployment.

Reviewer: Could we explain what introspection is in more detail? And possibly link to Ironic documentation about it: https://docs.openstack.org/ironic-inspector/latest/

Author: Latest update has some more information about the hardware introspection. Please let me know if that amount works.

At the end of 4.4, a Baremetal IPI deployment does not have hardware introspection
running on its master or worker nodes. The underlying provisioning service already has
the capability to perform hardware inspection on each of the servers periodically and update
the "status" field of the BareMetalHost CRD. Please refer to [1] for the latest BaremetalHost
CRD.

## Motivation

This enhancement will allow the user to get continuous updates on all the baremetal
servers in their Metal3 deployment providing useful metrics about the deployment and
monitor the health of the baremetal servers.

### Goals

This is enhancement will allow the baremetal host CR associated with each baremetal
server in a metal3 deployment to contain up-to-date informtaion about the HW and
operational status of a server.

### Non-Goals

This proposal does not include any changes to the BareMetalHost CRD.

## Proposal

> This enhancement proposes to add a new Daemonset started by the machine-api-operator

Reviewer: nit: `s/Daemonset/DaemonSet/g`

only for the BareMetal platform. This Daemonset would run a new container image
(ironic-hardware-inventory-recorder) on all master and worker nodes. This new service
would keep the Hardware status on each of these baremetal servers updated by continuously

> gathering HW parameters on each of these baremetal nodes.

Reviewer 2: We should explain that this new service already exists and we're using it for consistency with the inspection done on a worker host when it is initially registered with the cluster.

@elfosardo do we have any information about the memory or compute resource consumption of ironic-hardware-inventory-recorder?

Author: > We should explain that this new service already exists and we're using it for consistency with the inspection done on a worker host when it is initially registered with the cluster.
> 
Done.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The machine-api-operator would now be responsible for deploying the Daemonset that would
run the service that performs continuous HW introspection on baremetal hosts.The container
image for the Daemonset can be found at [2]. Also, if for some reason, a previously "ready"
metal3 deployment becomes "unavailable", the daemonset can continue to keep running.
This just will result in the lastest state of the baremetal servers in the baremetal CRs

> eventually become stale until metal3 transitions to "available"  operational state again.

Reviewer: Should we include information about how baremetal-operator will use this information? e..g when it's not busy reconciling it should be polling Ironic to update the Status field with introspection data

Author: In the past, we have stayed away from mentioning Ironic in our proposals because it was considered an implementation detail. So, I'll try to word it without actually mentioning Ironic.

### Risks and Mitigations

No technical risks forseen for this proposal.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Any e2e tests would make sure that the new Daemonset is running on all the master
and worker nodes in a Baremetal IPI deployment. The tests would make sure that
the HW status expressed in the BareMetalHost CR is updated periodically indicating
that the different components of the underlying service are communicating with each other.
Lastly, any e2e tests will make sure that the Daemonset is running even if "metal3"
is not.

### Graduation Criteria

[TODO] This feature is intended to be in tech preview in 4.5.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Upgrade to 4.5 and downgrade from 4.5 are both non-issues because there is no change to the
BareMetalHost CRD to implement this proposal. After a downgrade, the HW introspection data
will eventually become stale.

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

[1] - https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator/blob/master/install/0000_30_machine-api-operator_08_baremetalhost.crd.yaml

> [2] - https://quay.io/repository/openshift/origin-ironic-hardware-inventory-recorder

Reviewer 2: We could link to https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/master/design/hardware-status.md for more detail.

Author: Done.

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [X] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Continuous hardware inspection on all the master and worker nodes that are a part
of a Baremetal IPI deployment, allow the user to detect changes in server hardware
and become aware of any failures seen on the servers. This information can be used
to report current status of hardware to the user and/or glean metrics about the
health of the deployment.

At the end of 4.4, a Baremetal IPI deployment does not have continuous hardware introspection
running on its master or worker nodes. The underlying provisioning service already has the
capability to perform hardware inspection on each of the servers periodically. The
baremetal-operator (BMO) then reads this information and updates the "status" field of the
BareMetalHost CRD. Please refer to [1] for the latest BaremetalHost CRD.

## Motivation

> This enhancement will allow the user to get continuous updates on all the baremetal

Reviewer 3: can we add some real world scenarios here as user stories i.e "As a user I'd like to visualise when..."

Author: Done.

servers in their Metal3 deployment providing useful information about the hardware
capabilities of the servers.

### Goals

This enhancement will allow the baremetal host CR associated with each baremetal
server in a metal3 deployment to contain up-to-date informtaion about its hardware and
operational status of a server.

### Non-Goals

This proposal does not include any changes to the BareMetalHost CRD.

## Proposal

This enhancement proposes to add a new DaemonSet started by the machine-api-operator
only for the BareMetal platform. This DaemonSet would run a new container image

> (ironic-hardware-inventory-recorder) on all master and worker nodes. With the new

Reviewer 3: is there any scenario where we would want the machines to opt-out via e.g particular nodeSelector?

Author: The goal of this enhancement is to just focus on the work needed to enable collecting information for all master an worker nodes. We haven't envisioned this introspection as an optional task that can be turned off or opted out of based on config or node type. What we do with the introspection data is not within the scope of this enhancement but I can see that nodes could have an option to opt-out of any action taken based on introspection results.

@dhellmann what do you think?

Reviewer 2: One of the key points of this work is to provide information to the user about the hardware present in the node. I don't expect we would find any reason to decide to let a node opt out of reporting that.

Reviewer 4: Is this really only specific to baremetal users?  VMs can have PCI passthrough for dedicated hardware devices on supported platforms.  There's also virtual PCI devices.

Author: This enhancement is applicable to all deployments managed by "metal3". And "metal3" is currently used to manage baremetal deployments in production environments and VM based deployments only in test scenarios.

addition, it would become possible to have detailed information regarding the
hardware connected to both master and worker nodes in a metal3 deployment and not
just when the worker nodes are provisioned. This also allows the user to keep
track of any changes in hardware capabilities of servers in a metal3 deployment.

Additional details regarding enhancements made to the underlying service required
for this feature can be found in [3].

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Continuous hardware introspection involves periodically reading information about baremetal
server hardware by talking to the server directly. This information includes the details

> details about devices connected to each server like its CPUs, NICs and storage devices.

Reviewer 3: Would you envision that any information inferred here could be capture as a node condition that a MHC can watch and trigger some automated remediation activity?

Author: This would be future work and not addressed as part of this enhancement.

---
title: Continuous hardware introspecton of Baremetal IPI hosts
authors:
  - "@sadasu"
reviewers:
  - "@dhellmann"
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@hardys"
  - "@stbenjam"
  - "@juliakreger"
approvers:
  - "@dhellmann"
  - "@enxebre"
creation-date: 2020-02-18
last-updated: 2020-02-17
status: provisional|implementable|implemented|deferred|rejected|withdrawn|replaced
---

# Continuous hardware introspection of Baremetal IPI hosts

This proposal talks about how performing continuous hardware introspection on all master
and worker nodes in a Baremetal IPI deployment would get us important data about baremetal
hosts which can be used to monitor changes in hardware capabilities of the server.

This enhancement will not result in a new CRD or API to be written but will detail

> data that would become availabe in the Status field of the BareMetalHost CRD.

Reviewer 5: typo: available

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [X] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> Continuous hardware inspection on all the master and worker nodes that are a part

Reviewer 4: This proposal seems to be redundant with device plugins: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/device-plugins/

As for detecting some kind of failures, that is really the domain of the node problem detector.

I'd like to see a real end-to-end usecase of what this is actually used for.

Author: Thanks for a pointer to the device plugins. A quick scan revealed that using device plugins would require us to write drivers to gather information about hardware currently plugged into the server. But, we want to leverage an existing service that already reports data back to metal3 pod.

Author: This proposal separates out the "infrastructure" pieces that are needed for the collection of data and we don't want its progress to be slowed down by the discussion around how the collected data is going to be presented. I am working on another proposal that details how this information collected via continuous hardware introspection would be integrated into the metric stack. Please stay tuned.

Reviewer 6: please see my comment here too: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/229#discussion_r388508679

Reviewer 4: My concerns are that some of this tooling does not sound specific to the bare metal usecase, and we should try to utilize the tooling already available.  There is a higher level discussion about the UX of the product rather than just the needs of the metal3 use case that needs to be had, and I don't see any of the people that need to be involved in that discussion here.

Reviewer 5: @michaelgugino the point here is to populate the BareMetalHost with information about the hardware so that e.g. if a disk is hot-swapped or a server is physically modified in some way (e.g. upgrading RAM) or the external network configuration is changed, the latest state is reflected in the Host. (In the case of master nodes this is needed for it to contain any state at all.) This allows the administrator responsible for the bare-metal infrastructure to treat this as a source of truth, and that *is* very specific to bare metal.
It's not about providing scheduling information to applications, and it includes a lot of information that wouldn't be suitable for device plugins (such as serial numbers of disks).

Reviewer 4: @zaneb is that specific to bare metal?  Someone could attach a new drive to a VM on any number of platforms.

of a Baremetal IPI deployment, allow the user to detect changes in server hardware
and become aware of any failures seen on the servers. This information can be used
to report current status of hardware to the user and/or glean metrics about the
health of the deployment.

At the end of 4.4, a Baremetal IPI deployment does not have continuous hardware introspection
running on its master or worker nodes. The underlying provisioning service already has the
capability to perform hardware inspection on each of the servers periodically. The
baremetal-operator (BMO) then reads this information and updates the "status" field of the
BareMetalHost CRD. Please refer to [1] for the latest BaremetalHost CRD.

## Motivation

This enhancement will allow the user to get continuous updates on all the baremetal
servers in their Metal3 deployment providing useful information about the hardware
capabilities of the servers.

### Goals

This enhancement will allow the baremetal host CR associated with each baremetal

> server in a metal3 deployment to contain up-to-date informtaion about its hardware and

Reviewer 7: s/informtaion/information

Author: Done.

operational status of a server.

### Non-Goals

This proposal does not include any changes to the BareMetalHost CRD.

## Proposal

This enhancement proposes to add a new DaemonSet started by the machine-api-operator
only for the BareMetal platform. This DaemonSet would run a new container image
(ironic-hardware-inventory-recorder) on all master and worker nodes. With the new
addition, it would become possible to have detailed information regarding the
hardware connected to both master and worker nodes in a metal3 deployment and not
just when the worker nodes are provisioned. This also allows the user to keep
track of any changes in hardware capabilities of servers in a metal3 deployment.

Additional details regarding enhancements made to the underlying service required
for this feature can be found in [3].

### User Stories [optional]

#### Story 1

> As a user, I would like to know the current hardware and its capabilities for each

Reviewer 8: How does this relate to the node-feature-discovery efforts? Can you hook into those?
- https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery#local-user-specific-features 
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-nfd-operator

Reviewer 6: A major difference between this and other kube-centric functionality is that we actually run these tools first before RHCOS is even deployed so we can gather hardware details about all the hosts in our inventory, even before they have been provisioned to be part of a cluster.  This enhancement is how to continue running those tools later to ensure the data we have stays up to date.

It's really a minor update to something already being used, and switching to alternative tooling would be a much broader effort, including figuring out how to run these tools to collect data in a ramdisk, without the host yet being a kubernetes Node.

Some consolidation around hardware inspection tooling sounds like a good long term target, but not so pragmatic given current architecture and needs.

Reviewer 4: It seems to me the purpose of this proposal is to discover host capabilities so we can expose that information to workloads.  We should try to conform with the upstream way of doing this.  A combination of NFD and device-plugins seems to be the right course.  If we install CoreOS on actual bare metal (eg, not using metal3), then that is what I think we would require.  We should try to be as consistent as possible across our deployment types.

Author: This feature allows us to report on parameters like model number, vendor firmware version etc of the hardware plugged into the server. (see https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator/blob/master/install/0000_30_machine-api-operator_08_baremetalhost.crd.yaml#L242). 
So, this is different from the data reported by the NFD. But, having said that we would need to add support for the NFD also for the Baremetal IPI platform.

Author: The service that performs continuous hardware introspection collects information that is described here (https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator/blob/master/install/0000_30_machine-api-operator_08_baremetalhost.crd.yaml#L242). Our concern regarding augmenting NFD to report these values is that some of this information might not be available for other platform types. 
In any case, we understand the need to collaborate with the NFD team. We are working with our PM to prioritize this effort based on customer feedback from this feature. For those reasons, we would like to proceed with the current approach detailed in this proposal.

> As a user, I would like to know the current hardware and its capabilities for each

Reviewer 7: "the current status of the hardware" ?

Author: Done.

> As a user, I would like to know the current status of the hardware and its capabilities

Reviewer 5: Starting a story with "as a user" has a tendency to blur the lines between what can be quite different roles - especially between people operating applications on top of the cluster and those operating the cluster itself. Sometimes those are the same people, but often they're not.

In this case, the information is of interest to the person whose job it is is to manage the physical hardware through the metal³ resources. But a lot of the comments are interpreting it as primarily being of interest to application developers needing to find ways of determining which nodes to schedule their applications to. Perhaps being more explicit could help to reduce the confusion.

It might also help to be more explicit about some of the use cases. e.g. "As an administrator tasked with managing the physical infrastructure, I'd like to be able to determine the serial number of every disk currently in use and trace them back to a particular host." I suspect that we don't yet have a completely clear idea of what all of these things might be used for (at least I don't) and that might be part of the difficulty with explaining it.

Author: Yes, I think this data is useful mostly to a cloud admin and not to an end user who trying to run an application on this infrastructure. Let me try to reword.

of the baremetal servers in my Baremetal IPI deployment.

#### Story 2

> As a user, I would like to know of any changes in hardware and capabalities of each

Reviewer 7: "changes in the hardware status" ?

Author: Done.

> As a user, I would like to know of any changes in hardware status and capabalities of each

Reviewer 5: typo: capabilities

baremetal server while it is part of my Baremetal IPI deployment.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Continuous hardware introspection involves periodically reading information about baremetal
server hardware by talking to the server directly. This information includes the details

> details about devices connected to each server like its CPUs, NICs and storage devices.

Reviewer 9: Nit, details is already on the line above
```suggestion
about devices connected to each server like its CPUs, NICs and storage devices.
```

The actual task of performing hardware introspection is provided by a service that needs
to run on all master and worker nodes. The baremetal-operator polls this service for
hardware introspection data on all baremetal hosts when it is not busy reconciling. The

> baremetal-operator then updates the status on their respective BareMetalHost CRs.

Reviewer 5: I think these last two sentences are conflating two different things.
AIUI the IPA agent container will run as a DaemonSet on all hosts. It pushes data back to ironic-inspector service (running within the baremetal-operator pod).
The baremetal-operator will (but currently does not) poll the ironic-inspector service to update the CRs.

Hardware inspection is curently done on the worker nodes once when it is initially registered

> with the cluster. This information could get outdated unless this introspection is performed at

Reviewer 5: It would be worth explicitly mentioning that the BareMetalHost has no information about the hardware of master nodes without this.

Author: Yes, will do.

regular intervals and on all (master and worker) nodes. Details of the underlying service
service that is used to perform the continuous hardware inspection can be found

> at [3]. Information on how baremetal-operator interracts with this underlying service is

Reviewer 7: s/interracts/interacts

Author: Done.

- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Continuous hardware inspection on all the master and worker nodes that are a part
of a Baremetal IPI deployment, allow the user to detect changes in server hardware
and become aware of any failures seen on the servers. This information can be used
to report current status of hardware to the user and/or glean metrics about the
health of the deployment.

At the end of 4.4, a Baremetal IPI deployment does not have continuous hardware introspection
running on its master or worker nodes. The underlying provisioning service already has the
capability to perform hardware inspection on each of the servers periodically. During 4.5, the
goal is to enable continuous hardware introspection all master and worker nodes by running the
above mentioned service in a DameonSet. Another piece of this solution would be to enable the
baremetal-operator (BMO) to read this information and update the "status" field of the
BareMetalHost CRD. Please refer to [1] for the latest BaremetalHost CRD.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 10: I find this section to be lacking. Please feel free to link to the intent to expose metrics/alerts based on this data. Which is a separate enhancement. This is a pre-req.But understanding the why is important.

Author: I have updated this section.

capabilities of the servers.

### Goals

This enhancement will allow the baremetal host CR associated with each baremetal
server in a metal3 deployment to contain up-to-date information about its hardware and
operational status of a server.

### Non-Goals

This proposal does not include any changes to the BareMetalHost CRD.

## Proposal

This enhancement proposes to add a new DaemonSet started by the machine-api-operator
only for the BareMetal platform. This DaemonSet would run a new container image
(ironic-hardware-inventory-recorder) on all master and worker nodes. With the new
addition, it would become possible to have detailed information regarding the
hardware connected to both master and worker nodes in a metal3 deployment and not
just when the worker nodes are provisioned. This also allows the user to keep
track of any changes in hardware capabilities of servers in a metal3 deployment.

Additional details regarding enhancements made to the underlying service required
for this feature can be found in [3].

### User Stories [optional]

#### Story 1

As an administrator tasked with managing the physical infrastructure, I would like to

> know the current status of the hardware and its capabilities for each of the baremetal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
know the current status of the hardware and its inventory data for each of the baremetal
```

servers in my Baremetal IPI deployment.

#### Story 2

As an administrator tasked with managing the physical infrastructure, I would like to know

> of any changes in hardware status and capabilities of each baremetal server while it is part

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of any changes in hardware status and inventory data of each baremetal server while it is part
```

of my Baremetal IPI deployment.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Continuous hardware introspection involves periodically reading information about baremetal
server hardware by talking to the server directly. This information includes details
about devices connected to each server like its CPUs, NICs and storage devices. The
actual task of hardware introspection is performed by an agent that needs to collect

> information on all master and worker nodes and hence needs to run as a DaemonSet.

Reviewer 10: What if there are nodes which are not being driven by metal3? What if I joined my own RHEL7 node to the cluster? What label are you going to have on nodes managed by metal3 which this daemonset will select?

Also what taints do you plan to tolerate with this daemonset?

Reviewer 11: Currently IPI baremetal doesn't support RHEL nodes (and there are no plans to add that AFAIK), but if you manually added a node I suspect it'd run the agent and register with ironic-inspector, but we'd do nothing with that data because there's no corresponding BareMetalHost object - something we'd have to test I guess (although I'm not sure if we'd support joining RHEL nodes to an IPI barmetal cluster?)

We would have to consider this situation if/when automated discovery of nodes is added (currently ironic can do this, but the baremetal-operator doesn't create BareMetalHost objects from discovered nodes).

Reviewer 11: @sadasu  Could we perhaps add a label to all nodes IPI actually deployed, then ensure the DaemonSet only schedules the agent container on those nodes?

Reviewer 10: I believe we support joining RHEL7 (or BYO RHCOS) nodes to other cluster installs. Why would this one be different? The only limitation I'm aware we make (and it's because of code, not support) is that the nodes (RHEL7 or RHCOS) you bring yourself need to be on the same cloud if you configured a cloud provider.   I don't believe we have a cloud provider configured in a cluster installed via bare metal ipi, and thus wouldn't hit the only known restriction.

Author: Updated the "Design Details" section with this information.

Author: Yes, updated the "Design Details" section with this information.

This agent then periodically pushes data back to a service running with the metal3 pod. The
baremetal-operator, also running within the metal3 pod, needs to poll this service for
hardware introspection data when it is not busy reconciling. The baremetal-operator then
updates the status on their respective BareMetalHost CRs.

Hardware inspection is curently done on the worker nodes once when it is initially registered
with the cluster. This information could get outdated unless this introspection is performed at
regular intervals. Currently, there is no hardware introspection data on the master nodes and
implemnting this feature will give us access to that data. Details of the underlying service
used to perform the continuous hardware inspection can be found at [3]. Information on how
baremetal-operator interacts with this underlying service is detailed in [4].

The machine-api-operator would now be responsible for deploying the DaemonSet that would
run the service that performs continuous hardware introspection on baremetal hosts.The container

> image for the DaemonSet can be found at [2]. Also, if for some reason, a previously "ready"

Reviewer 2: It's not wrong, but I'm not sure why this part about metal3 restarting is included here. Is that a special case we're worried about?

Author: No. Just trying to be explicit about expected behavior. I could remove it if the enhancement doc is not the right place for this.
